# ✈️ NASA Jet Engine RUL Predictor (XGBoost & Random Forest)

This project predicts the **Remaining Useful Life (RUL)** of turbofan jet engines using the NASA C-MAPSS dataset. It achieves an RMSE of **22.86** using a physics-guided XGBoost approach focused on just two critical sensors: **T50** (LPT Outlet Temp) and **Ps30** (HPC Outlet Pressure).

The project also includes a **Random Forest** implementation for comparison (RMSE 23.78), allowing users to benchmark the "Boosting" vs "Bagging" strategies directly.

## 📊 Key Features
* **Physics-Aware:** Tracks specific degradation signatures in Temperature and Pressure.
* **Velocity Detection:** Uses sensor *slope* (rate of change) to detect the specific moment degradation begins (The "Knee" point).
* **Dual Models:**
    * **XGBoost (Main):** Uses Gradient Boosting for superior accuracy (**RMSE 22.86**).
    * **Random Forest (Baseline):** Uses Bagging for robust stability (**RMSE 23.78**).
* **Interactive Dashboard:** Streamlit app for real-time engine diagnostics.

## ⚠️ Important Note on Results
* Running **train.py** and then **train_xgboost.py**  generate the submission file named **`final_predictions_RMSE.txt`**.

## 🚀 How to Run

### Option A: Run XGBoost (Recommended)
1.  **Train the Model:**
    ```bash
    python train.py
    python train_xgboost.py
    ```

(This might take upto 1-20 minutes depending on your machine to train the model and form the .pkl file)

2.  **Launch Dashboard:**
    ```bash
    streamlit run app_xgb.py
    ```
If you on only want to run the **Random Forest** then just
   ```bash
   python train.py
   streamlit run app.py
   ```
You can also calculate the RMSE by running (only calculates the XGBoost's RMSE)
  ```bash
  python RMSE_calc.py
  ```
This calculates the RMSE using the final_predictions_RMSE.txt (the results using our models) and the real_result.txt (RUL_FD001.txt from NASA, aka the actual results)
  
    
## 📂 Project Structure
* `train_xgboost.py`: XGBoost Training Pipeline (Generates `xgb_model.pkl`).
* `app_xgb.py`: Dashboard using the XGBoost model.
* `train.py`: Random Forest Training Pipeline (Generates `rf_model.pkl`).
* `app.py`: Dashboard using the Random Forest model.
* `final_predictions_RMSE.txt`: The final list of 100 predictions (Generated by whichever script ran last).
